## Understanding the Social and Infrastructural Factors Relating to Spatial Inequality

According to the latest census data available globally, more than half the world’s population lives in urban areas. This, of course, is influenced by how governments define ‘urban area’ to be, as each nation uses its own criteria of density, employment, land-use, etc. However, one can agree that the proportion of dense, urban settlements is increasing. (Satterthwaite 2002)

Cities are more than just a collection of people. They promote the development of heterogeneity. Social interactions among dissimilar groups break down traditionally rigid hierarchical boundaries such as caste or race, and add a layer of complexity by introducing ‘class’. This further complicates existing social stratification. (Wirth 1938)

Historically, spatial segregation in human settlements in India has been along caste and religious lines. Caste also influences social and material capital. Today with the introduction of ‘class’, this spatial segregation in metropolitan cities tends to manifest itself into ‘elite’ and ‘non-elite’ areas. Using Mumbai as an example, Colaba is home to some of India’s wealthiest individuals, while Dharavi, less than 10 miles away is home to Asia’s largest slum. (Sarpotdar 2017)

Caste-based discrimination has been outlawed since the adoption of the current Constitution in 1950 and the Indian Penal Code. Despite provisions for affirmative action, and social development programs aimed at historically oppressed castes, they continue to face challenges in accessing quality education, housing, health services, employment, and public infrastructure. It should be noted, however, that regional differences exist in the way each group is identified, and the intensity with which discrimination occurs varies. (Zacharias and Vakulabharanam 2011) Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, the principal author of the current Constitution of India writes in his treatise ‘The Annihilation of Caste’ that caste is not only a division of labor but a division of laborers. The relationship between caste and class in India is a close one, and thus the two can seldom be considered two separate categories.

A large number of papers and research articles written on the state of India’s cities, the caste-system, social hierarchy, and economy exist. These studies have historically been carried out on the back of smaller sample-survey data both due to the lack of availability of higher resolution data, and lack of computational capability. Thus, the dearth in data has severely restricted the scope of researchers studying these indicators at individual city and sub-city levels. Today with an increase in the availability of digitized and tabulated high-resolution data resources, quantitative research is becoming a possibility – at least in the largest metropolitan cities. (Zacharias and Vakulabharanam 2011) The 4 traditional metropolitan cities of Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, and Kolkata along with the three largest state capitals of Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, and Bangalore tend to dominate any discussion of urban study. However, with nearly five hundred cities in India with a population of more than one hundred thousand we need to understand these cities’ individual patterns of growth, development, and networks. (Sarpotdar 2017)
